So, we need to now send
the password reset token via email to the user.
And so in this lecture, we're gonna learn
how to send email using a very popular solution
called Nodemailer.
But before we do that, I actually wanted to show you
the effect of not having this option here,
because I actually never showed you before.
So let's cut it here, try it now, again,
and so now you see all these errors coming up
like please confirm your password.
And, actually, there should be more,
but, well, this is now the first one that you get.
Basically, because we don't have any value
on the password confirm field.
Okay?
And so again, that's because of the validation
and so again we can, of course, easily
turn it off with this option.
But anyway, let's now create an email handler function
that we can then use throughout our application.
So I'm gonna do that right here
in the Utilities folder, again,
and simply calling it email.js.
All right?
And before we do anything else,
let's actually install the Nodemailer package.
So that's the package that I mentioned
right in the beginning,
which we're gonna use to send email using Node.js.
So, as always, npm install nodemailer.
And in here.
All right, and now let's create that function here.
So constant email,
okay, and then in here,
we're gonna pass in some options basically.
So the email address where we want to send an email to,
the subject line, the email content,
and maybe some other stuff.
All right.
And so now we need to follow three steps
in order to send emails with Nodemailer.
So first up, we need to create a transporter.
Then second,
we need to define the email options, basically,
and then in the end,
actually send the email with Nodemailer.
Okay?
So, the transporter that we made in the first step here,
is basically a service that will actually send the email,
because it's not node.js that will actually
send the email itself.
It's just a service that we define in here.
Something like Gmail, for example.
Now, Gmail is not actually the service
that we're gonna use,
but let me just quickly show you how it works
with Gmail, because I know that many people
will be interested in this, okay?
So, anyway, we need to always create a transporter,
and that's always the same,
no matter what service we're gonna use.
So the transporter will be
nodemailer.createTransport
and then, of course, we need some options in there.
All right?
So we can specify the service
and we can say that we want to use Gmail.
So, just like this.
And there are a couple of well-known services
that Nodemailer knows how to deal with,
and so we don't have to configure these manually.
And so Gmail is just one of them.
But also there is Yahoo, or Hotmail, or many others, okay?
So that's the service,
and then we also need to specify the auth property,
so basically for authentication.
So we need a user and a password.
And so just like before,
we save that kind of stuff in our config.n file.
All right.
So email,
that's a username,
and now I'm not going to use a real Gmail address here
because, again, we're not using Gmail,
but just as an example here, all right.
Your password.
All right.
So here we're done, say,
process
dot end dot
EMAIL_USERNAME
the password process dot end
dot EMAIL_PASSWORD
and I hope I spelled these correctly.
Okay?
And so this is the configuration
for the transport in Nodemailer.
Then in your Gmail account,
you will actually have to activate something
called the less secure app option.
So let me write that down here.
And again, I'm not going to do it here,
but I know that many people
will actually want to use it.
And the reason why we're not using Gmail
in this application
is because Gmail is not at all a good idea
for a production app.
And so that's basically what we're trying to build here.
Okay?
So using Gmail for this kind of stuff,
you can only send 500 emails per day,
and also, you will probably very quickly be marked
as a spammer, and from there, it will only go downhill.
All right?
So, unless it's like a private app,
and you just send emails to yourself,
or, like, 10 friends,
well, then you should use another service.
And some well-known ones are SendGrid and Mailgun.
And, actually, we will use SendGrid a bit later
in this course.
Now, what we're gonna do right now
is to use a special development service,
which basically fakes to send emails to real addresses.
But, in reality, these emails end up trapped
in a development inbox, so that we can then take a look
at how they will look later in production.
All right?
So that service is called Mailtrap,
and so let's now sign up for that.
So.
Mailtrap.io,
all right?
So, and as I say, safe email testing
for staging and development.
So basically, with this service,
you can fake to send emails to clients,
but these emails will then never reach these clients,
and instead be trapped in your Mailtrap, okay?
And so that way you cannot accidentally
send some development emails to all of your
clients or users, okay.
So go ahead and sign up now.
I, of course, already have my account,
and so I will simply log in now.
So see you in a second, after you have created
your free account.
All right, so after creating your account,
it will probably look a little bit like this.
Now, you won't have any inbox for now,
and so let's just create a new one,
with the name of natours.
So, I already have one, but just create a new one here,
with the natours name, and then hit Create Inbox.
All right?
Then we can open it,
and you see we have no email at this point,
but what matters for now
is these credentials here.
So you see we have our host here,
we have the port, username, and password.
And so that's what we're gonna specify
in our transport in Nodemailer now.
All right?
So let's start with the host,
well, actually, with the username,
so these two, I just need to copy
so let's copy it to our config file,
so that's the username,
then that's the password,
and now we actually also need to specify the host.
Okay, and so that's because Mailtrap is not
one of these predefined services that comes with Nodemailer.
All right.
The port is 25.
So give it a save,
and then in here, let's get rid of this,
and what I need to specify instead is the host
so email,
host,
and, of course, the port.
So everything that we just saved before.
All right, then the authentication here
is the exact same.
Let's get rid of this as well,
and move on to step number two.
So basically defining some options for our email.
All right, and we could, of course,
do step two and three all at the same,
but I like to simply prefer these options here first.
Okay, and so here we specify
where the email is coming from,
so the name,
and then the email address like this.
Next up, we need the recipient's address,
and so that one, I'm gonna specify as an option,
okay?
So basically, coming as an argument to this function.
So this options object here,
is this one that we pass into the function.
All right.
Then actually the same for the subject and for the text.
Let's just duplicate these here,
So the subject and then
we just specify the text property,
and that one, in the options, I'm just calling it message.
All right, so this one is basically
the text version of the email.
But we can then also specify the HTML property.
Okay, and so we could now then convert this message to HTML.
And later, we're going to do that, but for now,
let's keep it simple and not specify the HTML here, at all.
Okay?
So simply leaving it at text.
Okay!
And then finally, at the end,
transporter, so that's the transporter object
that we created right here in the beginning,
and on that, we can then call sendMail
and into that we need to pass in our mail options, okay?
And now this actually returns a Promise.
Okay, so again, this is an asynchronous function,
and since we don't want to directly work with Promises,
let's use async/await.
All right.
So declaring this as an async function
and there we go.
All right.
We don't want to store any result here,
which we could, but I'm not really interested in that.
Okay, and now let's simply export it
as the default from this module.
Okay, looks good!
Now let's now go ahead and actually try this.
And so to start, we need to import it here, of course.
So let's just duplicate this here,
so this is email,
and the function is called sendEmail I think.
Okay.
So let's go back to our middleware function here,
and let's start by defining the reset URL.
So, ideally, the user will then click on this email
and will then be able to do the request from there.
And that's gonna work later
when we implement our dynamic website,
but still, we now want to create this URL here,
so that the user can simply copy it,
to make it easier to do this request.
Okay, so basically we need to recreate
this URL structure that we have here.
So this one is for forgot password
and let's actually save it here.
So, forgot password, and now the URL
that we're creating is actually for reset password.
So, remember, we actually implemented that one before.
Okay.
Let's just go ahead and copy it here,
so reset password, all right?
And that will then actually take the token
as a parameter.
Okay, so let's just put any random token in here for now.
So it doesn't matter at all.
Let me just save it here,
as reset password.
Okay.
And also, it's not GET, it's also not POST,
but it's PATCH, because the result of this
will be the modification of the password property
in the user document.
And so PATCH is the best one actually, okay?
So let's quickly change our route implementation for this.
So, it's here in userRoute,
so it's not POST, it's PATCH,
and we also want to specify a parameter.
So, remember how we do that.
So it's just like down here.
So another slash then colon, and then the name
of the parameter, which is gonna be token.
Okay, and let's build this now,
starting with the protocol.
So, HTTP or HTTPS, okay?
And we're basically gonna get that data from our request.
So that's stored on request dot protocol
then colon slash slash, and then the host, okay?
So we're basically preparing this one here to work
both in development and in production.
So, request dot get,
and then host.
All right, so this is how we get the host,
and then slash api slash version one,
and I guess it's not ideal to define a tier
hardcoded like this,
but again, this is something that we're gonna fix
a bit later, okay?
And I see that this is actually not correct.
These curly braces should be there.
So, now, users,
resetPassword,
and then yet another slash, and finally the token.
Okay, so, resetToken.
All right?
And as we discussed before, in the last lecture,
here we actually gotta send
the plain, original resetToken, and not the encrypted one.
All right?
We will then, in the next step,
compare the original token with the encrypted one.
So, again, just as we discussed in the last video.
Give it a save here now, and so that is our reset URL.
And now, based on this URL, let's quickly
create the message here as well.
So, Forgot your password?
Submit a PATCH request
with your new password
and passwordConfirm of course,
to the reset URL that we just created, okay?
So basically, giving the user some instructions here.
Then, on a new line, we also say,
if you didn't forget your password,
please ignore this email.
So that's kind of a common message,
and again, I'm sure you've seen it in some way
or another, all right.
So let's now, finally, send the email,
and remember that sendEmail
is an asynchronous function.
And so, therefore, we need to await it here.
Okay?
Because, of course, it's gonna return a Promise.
And remember now that the sendEmail function here
takes an object with some options.
So the email is user.email, right?
Or we could also say, req.body.email.
So that's exactly the same, actually, right?
Then the subject that we want to say is,
Your password reset token.
Let's say right away that it's only valid for 10 minutes,
so that the user knows that he has to hurry.
Okay, and then finally, the message, as well.
Okay.
So, we await that, and then after that,
let's also send, of course, some response.
Okay, so there always needs to be a response,
otherwise, as you already know,
the request/response cycle will never finish.
So we simply send a 200 code
and then a nicely formatted message
with a status of success,
and then just a quick message saying,
Token sent to email.
All right.
And, of course, we can not send the reset token right here,
by adjacent, right, because, then everyone could
just reset anyone's password,
and take over any account that they wanted.
And so that's the whole reason why we send it
to an email address, because we assume
that the email is a safe place,
that only the user has access to.
All right.
Whoo, so, this video, again is running quite long,
but we're still not done.
We're almost done, but not entirely,
because there might happen an error,
using this sendEmail, okay, and so in that case,
we, of course, want to send an error message to the client.
But in this case, we actually need to do more
than simply send an error message.
We need to basically, set back the password reset token
and the password reset expired that we defined, okay?
And so right now it's not enough to simply
catch the error and then send it down
to our global error handling middleware.
But instead we need to simply add
a try-catch block right here.
So again, because we actually want to do more
than simply send an error down to the client,
so we try basically to do this,
right, but in case there is an error,
then, of course, this block here is executed.
All right?
So what we want to do in that case,
well, we want to basically, as I said,
reset both the token and the expires property.
Okay.
So, passwordResetToken,
and set it to undefined, all right.
And the same for passwordResetExpires.
Okay.
And then, of course, just like before,
this only modifies the data, but doesn't really save it.
And so let's go add, grab this one,
and so to basically save the data in this case.
Okay, and then just to finish,
we, of course, then return with an error
to the next middleware.
So newAppError,
There was an error sending the email.
Try again later.
And in this case, the error code can actually be a 500.
So this is really then, like an error that's happened
on the server, and so it has to be a five code,
and 500 is just, like, the standard one.
All right.
So, let's now go ahead and try this out again, all right.
So this is quite a long one again, but, well,
we have to do it, right?
So, forgot password, with this email, let's check it out.
So this might not take a long time,
because of sending the email,
but actually it worked now, took like five seconds,
but we see Token sent to email.
and so, as we know, since we used Mailtrap,
it actually didn't send this email to hello@jones.io
but instead the email should be now trapped
inside of Mailtrap.
And, indeed, here on the left side, it now showed up.
All right.
So, that is the email that we specified
and here we get our nice URL.
Okay, so the one that we created with the protocol,
the host, and then also with the token.
So let's just take a look if this really
is our plain token,
so ending in 88df,
and, indeed, we have resetToken here, 88df.
And now in the database, we should have the token
ending in 1111.
So, let's confirm that, here in Compass,
give it a reload, and, indeed, here we go, okay?
And so again, this here is in 10 minutes from now.
Great, so we finished that part.
Next up, in the next video, we will then actually
reset the password,
based, of course, on the new password
that the user sends with the reset password request.
So, see ya there.